# Summary

Writing a book is a commitment for reader and writer alike. So in the
event you're deciding whether to make that commitment, here's a
[minimum description
length](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/minimum-description-length-principle)-motivated
summary of the key concepts behind the Network State. We'll do the one-sentence, one-paragraph, and one-page versions. For the ten-page
version, read [chapter one](/the-network-state). And for the one
hundred-plus-page version, read [the whole thing](/).

## One sentence

A network state is a social network with a clear leader, an integrated
cryptocurrency, a definite purpose, a sense of national consciousness,
and a plan to crowdfund territory.

## One paragraph

Technology has allowed us to start new companies, new communities, and
new currencies. But can we use it to create new cities or even new
countries? The key concept is to go cloud first, land last — but not
land never.

  1. First, form a social network around a clear leader, a proven centralized mechanism for dispute resolution in a decentralized world. Since anyone can found a network state, just like anyone can found a tech company or cryptocurrency, the legitimacy of this leader comes from whether people have opted in to follow them.

  2. Next, start doing meetups in the physical world, of increasing scale and duration, while simultaneously building an internal economy using cryptocurrency.

  3. Eventually, begin crowdfunding apartments, houses, and even towns to bring digital citizens into the physical world within real co-living communities.

  4. Finally, network these pieces together into a new kind of state: a *network state*, a digital archipelago with parts of territory distributed around the world.

As the population and economy of a network state grow comparable to
that of a legacy state, it will gradually be able to attain diplomatic
recognition from existing sovereigns — and ultimately the UN — just as
Bitcoin has now become a bona-fide national currency.

## One page

We begin with premises. Technology, cryptocurrency, China, India, and
Asia more generally are on the rise. America and the West writ broadly
are in decline from an economic, military, demographic, and political
standpoint. There are many exceptions to these broad trends — there
are positive developments at the state and city level in the US, as
well as in pockets of Europe, and the rise of innovation in bits has
not yet fully unlocked innovation in atoms — but broadly speaking our
future appears to be a centralized East and a decentralized West.

What should that decentralized West ultimately look like?

Not the current age of anarcho-tyranny, best exemplified by the city
of San Francisco, wherein the anarchy of unpunished public stabbings
is combined with the tyranny of unlimited parking tickets. That model
may well be exported to much of the Anglosphere before it reaches its
end-of-life, but fundamentally the state capacity of modern America is
just too low to maintain said tyranny for long.

Nor should it be the coming age of crypto-anarchy. If and when BTC has
replaced the USD as the global reserve currency, and the American
federal government's writ holds as much value as its devalued currency
— which is to say, none — Bitcoin citadels may well crop up in newly
lawless regions, funded by the wealth of early holders. But there are
many societal goods you can't easily buy — like a walk down the street
in a high-trust community — and Mad Max isn't a desirable long-term
outcome for anyone, even Bitcoin Maximalists.

Neither should our future be controlled by a still-intact Chinese
superstate. Nature abhors a vacuum, and a durably stateless West would
eventually prove a playground for foreign powers, who understand that
the non-aggression principle has always been trumped by the aggression
principle.

So if neither anarcho-tyranny, nor crypto-anarchy, nor Chinese
control...then what? Instead, we should start building towards
_crypto-civilization_. A new world where anyone can be either country
founder or crypto-citizen and can switch between these paths at any
time — much as you might choose to found a company or join one as an
employee. Where it is possible to peacefully start new countries, to
join them, to form alliances between them, to switch allegiances
between them, and to balance decentralized competition with
centralized cooperation.

The key enabling technology for this world is the concept of the
_network state_, a country you can start from your computer, an
archipelago of digitally-linked enclaves, a community aligned around
cryptographic consensus, a city-state in the cloud, a body based on
math rather than science, a group organized by geodesic over
geographic distance, a polity that prizes exit above voice, a state
that recruits like a startup, a territory one can acquire but not
conquer, a nation built from the internet rather than disrupted by it.

And that is the subject of [this book](/the-network-state).
